docs: add ALU design (#72)
reilabs/hieratika: docs/ALU Design.md

which is an equivalent of a value indicating undefined behavior that can propagate throughout the
program.

[According to the experiment](https://github.com/reilabs/llvm-to-cairo/issues/27#issuecomment-2397645979),
LLVM does not seem to emit such instructions from the Rust code, so the initial version of ALU will
not handle `nuw`, `nsw` or other keywords in any specific way.

### Intrinsics

The example above includes the following line:

```llvm
%0 = call { i64, i1 } @llvm.uadd.with.overflow.i64(i64 %left, i64 %right), !dbg !17
```

Unlike the previous example, this snippet does nto contain the `add` instruction. The adding
operation is done by an intrinsic named `llvm.uadd.with.overflow.i64`, which is called with the
`call` instruction. The intrinsic is defined in the LLVM codebase and its source code does not make
it into the `.ll` file produced out of the adding operation in Rust code.

The LLVM Language Reference Manual has an extensive list of intrinsics. Here's the example of
[`llvm.uadd.with.overflow.<ty>`](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#llvm-uadd-with-overflow-intrinsics).

> ### Data types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Data Types
```

Please remember that all section headings should use title case.

> This ALU will support only integers. Floating point numbers are out of scope of this document.

Reviewer: This is unnecessary to say. ALU means Arithmetic Logic Unit, as distinct from an FPU, a Floating Point Unit. It has no reason to support floats, and hence they are _obviously_ out of scope.

#### Integers

LLVM IR supports integers of arbitrary width. A general syntax for an integer type is `iN`, where
`N` can be anything from 1 to 2^32. Since LLVM does not have a dedicated type for boolean values,

> `i1` is used instead.

Reviewer: It is probably worth noting that at this stage we only intend to support `i1`, `i8`, `i16`, `i32`, `i64` and _maybe_ `i128`. We do not intend to add operations over arbitrary-width integers any time soon.

The Cairo VM internally operates on 252-bit-long field elements - `felt252`. On the higher level of
abstraction, the Cairo language supports
[integers of specific lengths](https://book.cairo-lang.org/ch02-02-data-types.html): 8 bit, 16 bit,
32 bit, 64 bit, 128 bit and 256 bit. Cairo also supports booleans.

[Rust supports integers of width from 8 to 128 bit](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch03-02-data-types.html)
with the same increment Cairo does, plus architecture-dependent `isize` and `usize`. Rust also
supports booleans.

> The Cairo VM does not have a classical registers of length constrained by the hardware. Therefore

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Cairo VM does not have classical registers of a length constrained by the hardware. Therefore
```

Technically it does have length-constrained registers, but they are just 252-bit cells instead.

there is no obvious indicator of how long `usize`/`isize` should be on that target. Since from the
LLVM point of view a pointer must have a finite size, this decision must be made based on some other
feature of the architecture. We have evaluated the following choices:

- The Cairo language already has 32 bit `usize`, so we can follow this approach, making `usize` and

>   `isize` also 32 bit,

Reviewer: We almost certainly do not want to do this. Our `isize` and `usize` will be defined in our target file, and will correspond to some integral size for which we have operations. The fact that Cairo has them as 32 bit is kinda irrelevant to our choice.

- The architecture's natural word size is 252 bit, being the length of the field element. It may be

>   reasonable to set `usize` and `isize` length to 252 bit,

Reviewer: I think this is potentially the most favorable option for when we define our own target.

- 256 bit is the next power-of-2 after 252. Having `usize` and `isize` 256 bit long leaves 4 extra
  bits that may be used to keep some metadata.

Ultimately the size of `usize` and `isize` has been decided to be 64 bits, which is neither of the
above possibilities. This length is a consequence of using the `aarch64-unknown-none-softfloat`
target triple. The choice of the triple determines the length of the pointer which in turn
determines the length of `usize`. This target triple is a temporary choice before a custom target
triple is proposed. It has been chosen for its soft float support and no host operating system. The

> pointer length is just one of its parameters we accept on this stage of the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pointer length is just one of its parameters we accept at this stage of the project.
```

> Summing up, we expect to see in the IR integers of the following lengths: 1, 8, 16, 32, 64 and 128

Reviewer: Which IR? If you mean LLVM IR we are unlikely to see `i128`, at least to start with.

Reviewer: At least initially we can construct our Rust programs to avoid that type! Furthermore, our target (`aarch64-unknown-none-softfloat`) does not have native support for them at the moment, so we are safe to bail _for now_.

bits.

#### Pointers

LLVM IR has only one generic pointer type - `ptr`, which works as a rough equivalent of the `void *`
in C. Type-specific pointers (e.g. equivalent of C's `int`) existed, but are now deprecated.

> Therefore, we expect to see in the input IR only the generic `ptr` pointer.

Reviewer: This is correct, but we _may_ be able to upgrade the compiler to perform context-based deduction of pointer types for later. It's worth thinking about if we need it.

> Not only Rust and the Cairo language support a generic pointer type, their support for pointer does

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not only do Rust and the Cairo language support a generic pointer type, their support for pointers does
```

not follow the mechanism known from C, which would smoothly translate into LLVM IR semantics. Both
languages operates on strongly typed smart pointers, that handle, under the hood, their own memory.

Based on these observations, ALU operations must be strongly typed, by the limitation of the
language it will be implemented in. When the input IR will be parsed, it generic pointer types must

> be inferred from the context, to allow matching with the proper implementation.

Reviewer: This is unclear to me. Can you give me more details about what this means?

#### Vectors

> Neither the Cairo VM, Cairo language nor no-std Rust have support for vector operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Neither the Cairo VM, Cairo language nor no-std Rust have support for vectorized operations.
```

LLVM IR has vectors as first class citizens. However,

> _[vector types are used where multiple primitive data are operated in parallel using a single instruction (SIMD)](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#t-vector)_.

Reviewer: I would limit the linked part of this to "vector types" or similar.

> If Cairo target definition supplied to `rustc` will not suggest the existence of vector extension on
> the target platform, we do not expect any vector intrinsics to appear in the IR. Therefore, vector
> support is not planned in the initial phase of the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If Cairo target definition supplied to `rustc` does not suggest the existence of vector extension on
the target platform, we would not expect any vector intrinsics to appear in the IR. Therefore, vector
support is not planned as part of the initial phase of the project.
```

> #### Type conversion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Type Conversion
```

Cairo does not have Rust's `as` keyword, so it's not possible to do e.g. `let a = b as u32` given
`b` is a `u64`.

An equivalent operation in Cairo is `let a: u32: b.try_into().unwrap();`. This approach has two
disadvantages:

- it will panic if the value of `b` is larger than `0xFFFFFFFF`,
- there is no automatic wraparound as in the case of `as`.

Should type conversion be necessary in the implementation of the operations, it will need to handle

> the type conversion with `try_into()` and manual recover from errors:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the type conversion with `try_into()` and manually recover from errors:
```

I'm not sure I understand this point. Our conversion operations are extension and truncation which just mess around with bits.

integer overflow).

The LLVM-to-Cairo infrastructure needs to deliver pieces of code translating generic LLVM arithmetic
operations to their counterparts specific to the Cairo VM architecture. This translation will be
done on the code level, during one of the LLVM-to-Cairo pipeline stages. Namely, this will be not
runtime translation, but rather a compilation time one. Therefore, there is no global state to be
managed during that time.

Additionally, it has been noticed
[in one of the experiments](https://github.com/reilabs/llvm-to-cairo/issues/27#issuecomment-2391893640),
that LLVM IR follows the same principle of not managing the internal state of arithmetic operations.
This is either done by

- returning a tuple containing both the operation result and the state information:

```llvm
%0 = call { i64, i1 } @llvm.uadd.with.overflow.i64(i64 %left, i64 %right), !dbg !17
%_3.0 = extractvalue { i64, i1 } %0, 0, !dbg !17
%_3.1 = extractvalue { i64, i1 } %0, 1, !dbg !17
br i1 %_3.1, label %panic, label %bb1, !dbg !17
```

- by demanding that input data is correct and producing undefined behavior otherwise,
- by emitting poison values, if producing a correct value is not possible.

> Based on these observations, we decide to deliver the ALU as a collection of stateless arithmetic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on these observations, we have decided to deliver the ALU as a collection of stateless arithmetic
```

operations.

### Tests

Cairo has an
[integrated test framework](https://book.cairo-lang.org/ch10-01-how-to-write-tests.html), similar to

> the one offered by Rust. Our ALU implementation will then come with a test suite to verify that we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the one offered by Rust. Our ALU implementation will come with a test suite to verify that we
```

implement the desired behavior, e.g. to make sure we indicate overflow on obvious situations like
`0xFFFFFFFF + 1` for a `u32` add.

## Design

### Overview

The ALU will be implemented as a source code written in
[Cairo](https://book.cairo-lang.org/title-page.html). During the
[LLVM-to-Cairo compilation pipeline](https://www.notion.so/reilabs/System-Architecture-113d2f80c874802b8480d997347933a2?pvs=4)

> it will be translated to `FlatLowered` objects. Then, on the linking phase, arithmetic operations

Reviewer: Not quite! We will have a modified version of the existing cairo compiler that will take our polyfill implementations, compile them to `FlatLowered` and then extracted to `.flo` files. The linker will then take _all_ the `.flo` files, those from the LLVM to Cairo compiler **and** the modified Cairo compiler and link them together.

from `FLIR` objects created from the input LLVM IR will be linked with their Cairo implementations.

As discussed in the relevant section of the Research part, each operation will be an independent,
stateless block of code composed of a single Cairo

> [function](https://book.cairo-lang.org/ch02-03-functions.html), which is an equivalent concept of a

Reviewer: I wouldn't rule out potentially having private subroutines that implement common bits of functionality! While avoiding calls is good for performance, we want to ensure that things are _maintainable_ instead of having a bunch of places to change.

function in any other procedural programming language.

Each function will follow the semantics of its LLVM IR counterpart. This requires:

- accepting the same number of arguments, of the same type and in the same order as the original
  operation's operands,
- returning the same number or values, of the same type and in the same order as the original
  operation.

> 

Reviewer: It also requires implementing _the exact semantics_ as expected by LLVM. If we do the two things above but get the semantics subtly wrong then that's a problem!

Each function will follow the naming scheme described in the relevant section below.

> ### Naming convention

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Naming Convention
```

> #### Instruction polyfills

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Instruction Polyfills
```

Name template: `__llvm_<opcode>_<ty1>_<ty2>`. In case the instruction works with both operands of
the same data type, the template degrades to `__llvm_<opcode>_<ty>_<ty>`.

In the example of `inst i32 %a, %b`, the polyfill would be named `__llvm_inst_i32_i32`.

If `<ty>` is `i1`, it is translated into `bool`. For an example instruction `inst i1 %a, %b`, the
polyfill would be named `__llvm_inst_bool_bool`.

In case the instruction works with pointer type, the generic LLVM keyword `ptr` is translated to
`p<ty>`. For an example instruction `inst ptr %a, i8 %b`, where `%a` is a pointer to the value of
the same type as `%b`, the polyfill would be named `__llvm_inst_pi8_i8`.

> #### Intrinsic polyfills

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Intrinsic Polyfills
```

Name template: `__<actual name with _ instead of .>_<ty>_<ty>`, where type `<ty>` indicates every
argument accepted by the intrinsic.

In the example of `llvm.uadd.with.overflow.i64(i64 %left, i64 %right)`, the polyfill would be named
`__llvm_uadd_with_overflow_i64_i64`.

All other naming rules defined for instructions also apply to intrinsics.

### Operations

> The list below specifies all implementations of arithmetic operations that will be provided by ALU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The list below specifies all implementations of arithmetic operations that will be provided by the ALU.
```

The list is divided to two parts:

> - implementations emulating LLVM instructions,
> - implementations emulating LLVM intrinsics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Implementations emulating LLVM instructions,
- Implementations emulating LLVM intrinsics.
```

Implementations for every supported integer lengths are specified. Their names follow the naming
convention explained in the section above. Each instruction or intrinsic name is a link to the
relevant part of the LLVM Language Reference Manual.

> #### Based on instructions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Based on Instructions
```

- [`add`](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#add-instruction):
  - `__llvm_add_i8_i8 -> i8`
  - `__llvm_add_i16_i16 -> i16`
  - `__llvm_add_i32_i32 -> i32`
  - `__llvm_add_i64_i64 -> i64`

>   - `__llvm_add_i128_i128 -> i128`

Reviewer: We can probably omit `i128`, for _now_ at least.

Reviewer: See above!

  - `__llvm_bitcast_pi16_to_pi32 -> pi32`
  - `__llvm_bitcast_pi16_to_pi64 -> pi64`
  - `__llvm_bitcast_pi16_to_pi128 -> pi128`
  - `__llvm_bitcast_pi32_to_pbool -> pbool`
  - `__llvm_bitcast_pi32_to_pi8 -> pi8`
  - `__llvm_bitcast_pi32_to_pi16 -> pi16`
  - `__llvm_bitcast_pi32_to_pi32 -> pi32`
  - `__llvm_bitcast_pi32_to_pi64 -> pi64`
  - `__llvm_bitcast_pi32_to_pi128 -> pi128`
  - `__llvm_bitcast_pi64_to_pbool -> pbool`
  - `__llvm_bitcast_pi64_to_pi8 -> pi8`
  - `__llvm_bitcast_pi64_to_pi16 -> pi16`
  - `__llvm_bitcast_pi64_to_pi32 -> pi32`
  - `__llvm_bitcast_pi64_to_pi64 -> pi64`
  - `__llvm_bitcast_pi64_to_pi128 -> pi128`
  - `__llvm_bitcast_pi128_to_pbool -> pbool`
  - `__llvm_bitcast_pi128_to_pi8 -> pi8`
  - `__llvm_bitcast_pi128_to_pi16 -> pi16`
  - `__llvm_bitcast_pi128_to_pi32 -> pi32`
  - `__llvm_bitcast_pi128_to_pi64 -> pi64`
  - `__llvm_bitcast_pi128_to_pi128 -> pi128`
- [`icmp`](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#icmp-instruction):
  - `icmp` accepts three arguments. The first is a comparison condition. The two others are operands
    of the same type. The condition is defined as an enum consisting of these values: `eq`, `ne`,

>     `ugt`, `uge`, `ult`, `ule`, `sgt`, `sge`, `slt`, `sle`.

Reviewer: You should specify whether we are taking the enum at runtime as an argument or whether the compiler needs to translate each comparison to a static call.

Reviewer: I mean it would be more efficient at execution time to have all 60 possible combinations rather than having to dispatch on the enum argument, but by the same token we don't actually care that much about performance _now_. I leave this up to you, just please document what the decision is so we don't end up with the compiler's code generation and the polyfills themselves disagreeing.

  - `__llvm_icmp_cond_bool_bool -> bool`,
  - `__llvm_icmp_cond_i8_i8 -> bool`,
  - `__llvm_icmp_cond_i16_i16 -> bool`,
  - `__llvm_icmp_cond_i32_i32 -> bool`,
  - `__llvm_icmp_cond_i64_i64 -> bool`,
  - `__llvm_icmp_cond_i128_i128 -> bool`,
- [`select`](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#select-instruction):
  - `__llvm_select_bool_bool_bool -> bool`,
  - `__llvm_select_bool_i8_i8 -> bool`,
  - `__llvm_select_bool_i16_i16 -> bool`,
  - `__llvm_select_bool_i32_i32 -> bool`,
  - `__llvm_select_bool_i64_i64 -> bool`,
  - `__llvm_select_bool_i128_i128 -> bool`,

> #### Based on intrinsics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Based on Intrinsics
```

  - `__llvm_smax_i8_i8 -> i8`,
  - `__llvm_smax_i16_i8 -> i16`,
  - `__llvm_smax_i32_i8 -> i32`,
  - `__llvm_smax_i64_i8 -> i64`,
  - `__llvm_smax_i128_i8 -> i128`,
- [`llvm.smin.*`](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#llvm-smin-intrinsic):
  - `__llvm_smin_bool_bool -> bool`,
  - `__llvm_smin_i8_i8 -> i8`,
  - `__llvm_smin_i16_i8 -> i16`,
  - `__llvm_smin_i32_i8 -> i32`,
  - `__llvm_smin_i64_i8 -> i64`,
  - `__llvm_smin_i128_i8 -> i128`,
- [`llvm_umax.*`](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#llvm-umax-intrinsic):
  - `__llvm_umax_bool_bool -> bool`,
  - `__llvm_umax_i8_i8 -> i8`,
  - `__llvm_umax_i16_i8 -> i16`,
  - `__llvm_umax_i32_i8 -> i32`,
  - `__llvm_umax_i64_i8 -> i64`,
  - `__llvm_umax_i128_i8 -> i128`,
- [`llvm.umin.*`](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#llvm-umin-intrinsic):
  - `__llvm_umin_bool_bool -> bool`,
  - `__llvm_umin_i8_i8 -> i8`,
  - `__llvm_umin_i16_i8 -> i16`,
  - `__llvm_umin_i32_i8 -> i32`,
  - `__llvm_umin_i64_i8 -> i64`,
  - `__llvm_umin_i128_i8 -> i128`,
- [`llvm.scmp.*`](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#llvm-scmp-intrinsic):
  - `scmp` returns needs to return at least `i2`. Since ALU does not operate on such type, the

>     closest possible type is `i8`.

Reviewer: We need to work out what is going to be seen in LLVM IR. The compiler is not going to be built to handle type extension like this, so if we see instructions returning `i2` we probably need to support it.

Reviewer: I am not suggesting that _we_ support all $2^{32}$ integer types, just that we need to find out what `rustc` generates in LLVM IR for the return type. If it generates `i8` we're golden, but if it generates `i2` it is beyond the scope of the compiler to handle that and we would need to provide appropriate polyfill operations.

> # ALU design

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# ALU Design
```

This document describes the research done for
[#27 Design ALU](https://github.com/reilabs/llvm-to-cairo/issues/27).

The first part, **Research**, describes selected features of LLVM IR, Rust and Cairo (both the
virtual machine and the programming language), that impact the way we must handle arithmetic and

> logic operations. The second part, **Design**, specifies decisions made with regard to the shape of

Reviewer: You can link "research" and "design" to the corresponding internal headers here. It'll help with document navigation.

`__llvm_instr_ptr` polyfill for an instruction accepting a single pointer argument, because such
construct is not supported by Cairo. Instead, we must provide the whole family of polyfills, one for
each possible pointer type:

- `__llvm_instr_pbool`,
- `__llvm_instr_pi8`,
- `__llvm_instr_pi16`,
- `__llvm_instr_pi32`,
- `__llvm_instr_pi64`,
- `__llvm_instr_pi128` _(optionally, if a triple supporting 128 bit integers is introduced)_.

Some of the implementations may be omitted if they do not reflect LLVM IR semantics for a given
instruction.

When the input IR will is parsed and a generic pointer is found, its concrete type must be inferred
from the context, to allow matching with the proper implementation. For example this IR snippet:

```llvm
%num = alloca [4 x i8], align 4
%_5 = ptrtoint ptr %num to i64, !dbg !13
```

must be mapped to the following implementation: `__llvm_ptrtoint_pi8_to_i64`, as `num` is a pointer
to an array of `i8`.

#### Vectors

Neither the Cairo VM, Cairo language nor no-std Rust have support for vectorized operations.

LLVM IR has vectors as first class citizens. However,

> _[vector types are used where multiple primitive data are operated in parallel using a single instruction (SIMD)](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#vector-type)_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_vector types are [used](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#vector-type) where multiple primitive data are operated in parallel using a single instruction (SIMD)_.
```

that LLVM IR follows the same principle of not managing the internal state of arithmetic operations.
This is either done by:

- returning a tuple containing both the operation result and the state information:

```llvm
%0 = call { i64, i1 } @llvm.uadd.with.overflow.i64(i64 %left, i64 %right), !dbg !17
%_3.0 = extractvalue { i64, i1 } %0, 0, !dbg !17
%_3.1 = extractvalue { i64, i1 } %0, 1, !dbg !17
br i1 %_3.1, label %panic, label %bb1, !dbg !17
```

- by demanding that input data is correct and producing undefined behavior otherwise,
- by emitting poison values, if producing a correct value is not possible.

Based on these observations, we have decided to deliver the ALU as a collection of stateless
arithmetic operations.

### Tests

Cairo has an
[integrated test framework](https://book.cairo-lang.org/ch10-01-how-to-write-tests.html), similar to
the one offered by Rust. Our ALU implementation will come with a test suite to verify that we
implement the desired behavior, e.g. to make sure we indicate overflow on obvious situations like
`0xFFFFFFFF + 1` for a `u32` add.

## Design

### Overview

> The ALU will be implemented as a source code written in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ALU will be implemented as source code written in
```
